hello everyone my name is J and I'm one
of the expert IELTS teachers at e2
language just before we begin if you
wouldn't mind please into the comments
below just put the country where you are
from I'll be interested to read all of
those countries in this live class we're
going to look at a arts academic writing
task one and we're going to focus in on
tables which can be really really tricky
so on Tuesday
you may be faced with something that
looks like this we need to turn this
into a hundred and fifty words we need
to try to get an IELTS nine or they're
about as close to we possibly can to
perfection so what are we going to do
the first thing you need to do on test
day is read the graph description
because without the description this is
kind of meaningless you might be able to
interpret something out of it but in
fact this first sentence of the graph
description will tell you what this
table is about it says the table below
shows the current packaging recycling
rates and the recycling targets of
various packaging materials for three
consecutive future years well this is a
really hard one let's look at this first
part here what does it show well it
shows first of all number one the
current packaging recycling rates here
are the current packaging recycling
rates okay whoops sorry about that and
the recycling targets of various
packaging materials here's the various
packaging materials we have paper
aluminium steel wood and total recycling
for three consecutive future years here
are the three consecutive future years
we'll spend a bit of time in a minute
understanding what this table is
representing but this is one of the
hardest things about IELTS academic
writing task 1 is first of all
understanding what you're looking at
second of all deciding what you're going
to write it's really really tricky
that's why we need a bit of a
superstructure
okay the superstructure that I'm going
to show you is based on the second
sentence here because this second
sentence is always the same in every
single IELTS writing task one that you
will see it always says summarize the
information select and report the main
features make comparisons these are the
three instructions this is what you have
to do so the superstructure is based on
those three instructions in essence what
you need to do is summarize describe and
compare okay this is what your task 1
will look like on test day you're going
to have a very brief summary at the top
just a single sentence maybe two
sentences in the second paragraph you're
going to describe the main trends and
the third paragraph is where it really
happens that's when you where you
compare data I'm going to show you how
to do all three of these so let's look
at how to summarize first that's this
sentence here all you need to do to
summarize is rewrite that description
that first sentence rewrite that in your
own words to say the exact same thing
okay so for example on the left hand
side here this is the original this is
the original here a regional and this
one is J's okay so the original says the
table shows a sorry at the table below
J's says the table of data the original
says shows mind says represent Y
represented not represents because data
is plural third sentence here third part
rather third phrase the current
packaging recycling rates I said both
the current rates of packaging recycling
and the recycling targets and I said and
the target rates of various packaging
materials I left this out for three
consecutive future years I said for
three years full colon not semi colon
full colon 2020 comma 2021 and 2022
so I my one here says the exact same
thing is this because I've just written
it in different words so it's really
accurate cool all I've done is that now
I want you to rewrite the task in your
own words if you're on YouTube press
pause give yourself about two minutes
make sure that it does say the exact
same thing but in different words okay
now what we're going to do is we're
going to describe that's what we're
going to do we're going to describe the
main trends only now if you have a line
graph or a bar graph try not to use any
of the y-axis information you can use
the x-axis information for line graphs
and bar graphs for tables it's a little
bit different okay four tables let me
read you mine I said the current rates
of recycling vary widely according to
material Wood is the least most recycle
they're just 21% this is followed by
aluminium which is recycled 50% of the
time paper is recycled 65% of the time
while steel totals seventy percent in
total sixty eight point two percent of
packaging is currently being recycled
each is expected to increase slightly
all I've described there with the
current rates of recycling I have not
mentioned anything about the future
rates of recycling because I'm going to
use that in my comparison later on so
when I talk about describing main trends
I'm just going to talk about current
rates of recycling for paper aluminium
steel wood and the total recycling so
here I want you to write not necessarily
seven sentences but I want you to write
definitely seven different descriptions
first I want you to describe the overall
differences just give me a sentence that
says I wrote something like percentages
of recycling vary widely among the
materials okay I want you to write
something like that in the second
description I want you to describe the
current paper recycling so it's
at 65% remember nothing from here
describe the current aluminium recycling
then steel then wood then the total
recycling which is here and then give an
overall prediction and what you can see
here is that 65 to 72 71 to 72 50 to 58
to 60 1 to 64 there's going to be a
slight increase so please go ahead and
write one paragraph using all of these
descriptions I'm going to give you five
minutes please press pause write this
and I'll see you in five minutes
now that you've described the general
current how can I say this it's not a
trend what are you doing you're
describing the current recycling rates
now that you've described the current
recycling rates now we're going to move
on to the next part where we're going to
compare okay we're going to compare just
before we do that let me go back to
where we described the current rates of
recycling vary widely according to
material Wood is the least most recycled
at just 21% this is followed by
aluminium which is recycled 50% of the
time paper is recycled 65% of the time
while steel totals seventy percent in
total sixty eight point two percent of
packaging is currently being recycled
each is expected to increase slightly
all I did was describe that I didn't get
into the future targets because now I'm
going to compare but the question is
what am I going to compare because I
need to choose categories to compare and
I have to include detailed precise
percentage information so when I look at
this I ask myself which categories am I
going to compare and I have two choices
number one I can compare material types
like paper versus steel for example I
can compare those or number two I can
compare one material and I can compare
the current rates versus the future
targets let me explain what I mean there
because it's quite complex I can compare
pay
versus steel and say while paper is 65%
steel is 70% and this is projected to be
here while this is going to go up by 8%
this is going to be 71 this is going to
be 80% that's not a good idea that's
going to be complicated I'm not going to
do that what I'm going to do is I'm
going to choose one material like paper
and I'm going to compare the current
rates first the future targets so I'm
going to say paper is currently 65% it's
predicted to grow by 5% by 2020 then
it's predicted to grow by 1% each year
to 2022 in my next sentence I'm going to
talk about aluminium is predicted to
increase by 8% recycling rates will
increase by 8% and thereafter they will
increase by 3% each year then I'll talk
about steel and I'll say the same thing
it's also predicted to increase by 8% by
2020 then it will increase by 2% year on
year to 2022 you can see that this is a
much easier way to compare that decision
about what you're going to compare is a
really important decision to make
because it can cost you your IELTS
writing if you compare the wrong things
your writing is going to be weird and
it's going to not be logical it's not
going to be right if you choose the
right things to compare your sentences
are going to be logical it's going to be
well-structured and the IELTS examiner's
going to be happy and that's what we
want cool so we're going to compare in
short we're going to compare current
versus future targets cool so let's do
that I'll read your mind mine says
comparing current trends to future
trends comma paper recycling is
predicted to increase by 5% in 2020 to
reach 70% and then increase by 1%
thereafter over the three years aluminum
recycling is expected to increase from
50 to 58 percent over the
three years and then continued modestly
by 3% each year similar to aluminium
steel recycling will increase by a
predicted 8% but then increase year I'm
near by just 2% wood will have the least
highest increase from its current rates
rising by just 4% over the next few
years where it will then increase by a
more significant 3% to 2022 probably
should be by 2022 sorry this is that's
probably the wrong preposition there let
me let me change that to by 2022 overall
the total amount of packaging to be
recycled
will climb from its current rate of
68.2% to 75 point four percent in 2022
cool fine I've made one mistake of a
preposition so this is what I want you
to do I want you to compare paper
recycling current rates versus future
rates
sorry targets I want you to compare
aluminium recycling current rates versus
future targets steel wood and then
finally your fifth sentence compare
total recycling I don't know why I've
written that twice that's an error
compare total recycling current rates
versus future targets I'll give you five
minutes pause the video and then come
back by the way if you're on YouTube
feel free to write your sentences into
the comments below to show you what I
mean here so for example you would say
alright let's look at paper or let's
let's say we choose wood because what's
the lowest okay so we start with wood
fine stuff the lowest one and it's gonna
rise by 4% so we'd say wood the current
rates of recycling for wood are 21%
these rates are expected to increase by
how much what's 25-21
by four percent by 2020 and these will
further increase or rise or climb by 3%
each year until 2022 this is how you
should write it keep it simple
the decision about what you compare is
so critical because it could be the
difference between a good score and a
bad score depending on what you what you
choose to compare let's have a look at
aluminium just as an example so the
current rate of recycling of aluminium
is 50% this is predicted to increase to
58% by 2020 and will increase
incrementally by 3% each year until 2022
you can see how easy it is to compare
this to write about that cool I'll give
you another couple of minutes I want you
to do it again
for those of you on YouTube I'm talking
to the paid IELTS e to language members
in the webinar I am looking at your chat
Abhishek and Mishka and Javed Khan but
unfortunately I'm talking to the paid
members here
all right let's have a look at that chat
again here in the webinar chat I should
say alright let's have a look at
khushboo is one again regarded targeting
amounts of different recycling materials
in the future it is predicted that each
element would be recycled with increased
rates than previous years paper is is
expected to reach not reach from you
reach a target number so to reach 75% so
not reach from never reach from reach
70% by 2020 and just a single percent
rise thereafter until 2022 excellent on
the other hand don't use on the other
hand it's not a it's not a it's not an
academic phrase some people say it is
but I think it's not I think it's a
conversational phrase so you can say in
contrast or comparatively or or
similarly if it's similar but not on the
other hand good though it's looking good
on the other hand aluminium is predicted
to be recycled at 8% incrementally and
then 3% with a 3% rise each year until
2022 steel is also assumed to achieve
its target by 8 of an 8% rise and then a
2 percent increments every year by ok
Koosh for yours is good you've
definitely got the idea here right
however your sentences are ungrammatical
there's some really fundamental errors
happening there which is going to reduce
your score quite significantly you
really have to get those cleaned up
I suggest feedback for that one Latifah
comparing the current rate verse future
rank comma paper will increase steadily
from 65% to 70% by 2020 and then we'll
increase regularly by 1% until 2022 good
you also tended to have an emphasis on
time they're steady regular these are
time adverbs
it's okay it's okay
that's fine that's fine good good good
good good good
all right let's push on oh you're
looking at me cool all right now that
we've compared the different recycling
rates of each material we would have
written something like this which I just
read you so ultimately this is what
we're going to build so let's recap what
we've learned in this lesson we've
learned that we have to do three things
in IELTS writing task 1 first we need to
summarize the table then we need to
describe the main trends then we need to
compare categories but I think probably
the hardest thing you have to do is make
the decision about what you will compare
because if you make the wrong decision
it's going to make your life a lot more
difficult if you make the right decision
it makes your life a lot easier because
you would just be able to write simpler
clearer cleaner sentences cool so think
about that that requires practice so
ultimately this is what you will write
on your test paper this is what it
should look like you can see distinctly
what we have here we have the summary we
have the description then we have the
comparison so this is the general
general trends this is just this is just
the task description that we that we
rewrote we rewrote that task description
and this one was that there was the data
so he compared the data we had to make
decisions about that that's probably the
hardest one to to write there what's
going on whoops
and there it dies let me bring it back
cool all right if you're on YouTube
you're watching this you need some help
with your IELTS check out this website
here e to language dot-com
we offer all sorts of stuff to help you
out including one-on-one tutorials
writing feedback speaking feedback heaps
of practice live mock test pronunciation
apps study plan consultations grammar
lessons vocabulary building lists
everything you need to make
English language fantastic we have it so
check out that website and sign up for
an account right now though I'm going to
answer some questions so if you have any
questions put them into the chat in the
meantime check that out
cool cool what have we got what do we
got what do we got all right all right
bye
yeah okay so Shareef saying that he's
got an issue with selecting selecting
the main features or what to compare